spec: abci2.0 -Incorporate content of RFC100 into the spec (#484)
cometbft/cometbft: spec/abci/abci++_app_requirements.md

Reviewer: This is out of the scope of this PR, but a general comment would be to consider moving the section "Formal Requirements" later in this doc.

Also: adding a table of content to this doc would help get an overview of it, since right now it's very large and has a lot of valuable information, but the structure is not obvious to me.

Reviewer: I'd be glad to open an issue to track my comments on this file, and fix that in a subsequent PR if it sounds like a nice-to-have later on.

Author: I added to TOC to this file but refactoring the sections is better done in a follow up PR I believe..as this is supposed to be just a backport and the later sections might refer to the previous one atm. So refactoring the text might require a bit more time. I can check with Sergio on this as well.

- [Formal Requirements](#formal-requirements)
- [Managing the Application state and related topics](#managing-the-application-state-and-related-topics)
  - [Connection State](#connection-state)
    - [Concurrency](#concurrency)
    - [Finalize Block](#finalizeblock)
    - [Commit](#commit)
    - [Candidate States](#candidate-states)
  - [States and ABCI++ Connections](#states-and-abci%2B%2B-connections) 
    - [Consensus Connection](#consensus-connection)
    - [Mempool Connection](#mempool-connection)
    - [Info/Query Connection](#infoquery-connection)
    - [Snapshot Connection](#snapshot-connection)
  - [Transaction Results](#transaction-results)
  - [Updating the Validator Set](#updating-the-validator-set)
  - [Consensus Parameters](#consensus-parameters)
    - [List of Parameters](#list-of-parameters)
    - [Updating Consensus Parameters](#updating-consensus-parameters)
  - [Query](#query)
    - [Query Proofs](#query-proofs)
    - [Peer Filtering](#peer-filtering)
    - [Paths](#paths)
  - [Crash Recovery](#crash-recovery)
  - [State Sync](#state-sync)
- [Application configuration required to switch to ABCI2.0](#application-configuration-required-to-switch-to-abci-20)

> 

Reviewer: I [suggested](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/484/files#r1141823124) to add a TOC, because I didn't realize GH has one. I managed to find it in the left-hand side of the view:

<img width="1282" alt="Screenshot 2023-03-21 at 09 33 49" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1757002/226553670-d86cfec3-0273-49ee-8b1f-9be661ab6a48.png"> 

Thanks for highlighting that Lasaro! I still think having the TOC directly in the file does not hurt.

> something to think about going forward when writing specs, RFC and ADR.

Agree. We might want to have a consistent approach. Good discussion to have internally another time.

In that case, the application needs to be properly configured and aware of certain constraints in terms of when
to provide vote extensions. More details can be found in the section below. 

Once a node switches to consensus, it operates like any other node, apart from having a truncated block history at the height of the restored snapshot.

## Application configuration required to switch to ABCI 2.0

Introducing vote extensions requires changes to the configuration of the application.

First of all, switching to a version of CometBFT with vote extensions, requires a coordinated upgrade. 
For a detailed description on the upgrade path, please refer to the corresponding 
[section](./../../docs/rfc/rfc-100-abci-vote-extension-propag.md#upgrade-path) in RFC-100.

There is a newly introduced [**consensus parameter**](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements.md#abciparamsvoteextensionsenableheight): `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight`. 
This parameter represents the height at which vote extensions are 
required for consensus to proceed, with 0 being the default value (no vote extensions).
A chain can enable vote extensions either:

> * at genesis by setting `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight` to be equal to the `InitialHeight`

Reviewer: Is it valid to have `InitialHeight + 1` instead of `InitialHeight`?

Author: Yes this is also valid, but then vote extensions are not enabled from the start, rather frm the height right above the starting height. So if they want vote extensions enavbled from the very beginning it has to be set to `InitialHeight`

information, it transitions to consensus. As of ABCI 2.0, CometBFT ensures the neccessary conditions
to switch are met [RFC-100](./../../docs/rfc/rfc-100-abci-vote-extension-propag.md#base-implementation-persist-and-propagate-extended-commit-history).
From the application's point of view, these operations are transparent, unless the application has just upgraded to ABCI 2.0. 
In that case, the application needs to be properly configured and aware of certain constraints in terms of when
to provide vote extensions. More details can be found in the section below. 

Once a node switches to consensus, it operates like any other node, apart from having a truncated block history at the height of the restored snapshot.

## Application configuration required to switch to ABCI 2.0

Introducing vote extensions requires changes to the configuration of the application.

First of all, switching to a version of CometBFT with vote extensions, requires a coordinated upgrade. 
For a detailed description on the upgrade path, please refer to the corresponding 
[section](./../../docs/rfc/rfc-100-abci-vote-extension-propag.md#upgrade-path) in RFC-100.

> The configuration file now contains a [**new consensus parameter**](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements.md#abciparamsvoteextensionsenableheight): `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a newly introduced [**new consensus parameter**](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements.md#abciparamsvoteextensionsenableheight): `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight`. 
```

This parameter represents the height after which vote extensions are 

> required for consensus to proceed, with 0 being the default value (no vote extensions).

Author: @sergio-mena , maybe I have not a clear understanding, but let's say a chain is just starting and wants to have vote extensions, but the default value here is 0. Should we not say something like - we have to set this to at least 1? Because someone starting from scratch with a version of the software having extensions enabled, might assume they are enabled by default?

Reviewer 2: Good point.
First, I realize we're not mentioning that the ConsensusParam can be set at genesis. So, typically, for chains starting from scratch and having vote extensions from their app's first version, they just need to set `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight` to 1 at genesis and forget about the upgrade path. We need to say this somewhere in the spec.
Second, to your question. We (our team) discussed about the default value at genesis last spring in some PR (I'll try to pull it up). I remember thinking default value at genesis should be 1, but then people convincing me that 0 is better. Now, when I think of it, it makes total sense to me that the default value is zero, for compatibility with existing genesis docs.
Let me know if you're still unclear in some aspect.

Reviewer 2: > they just need to set VoteExtensionsEnableHeight to 1 
actually, to be precise, they need to set it to their `InitialHeight` parameter

Author: Yes, I know and agree it should be 0 by default. But as you said, I think we should state it that, if they do want vote extensions they have to change it, they will not magically be turned on. Of course, it can be deducted from the spec, but I think it's better to be clear on this as people might just skim through some parts of the spec.

Reviewer 2: > I'll try to pull it up

[Here](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/8453#issuecomment-1116135296) it is (took some time :-) )

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

Just make sure it's clear that there are two way of enabling vote extensions:
* Via app's logic at a given height, by changing the ConsensusParam
* Via setting it to `InitialHeight` in the genesis. This way, the app does not need to do anything to have extensions enabled from the very beginning.
BTW, this distinction also applies to other parts of CometBFT's state, such as validator updates.

Once the (coordinated) upgrade to ABCI 2.0 has taken place, at height  *h<sub>u</sub>*,
the value of `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight` MAY be set to some height, *h<sub>e</sub>*,
which MUST be higher than the current height of the chain. Thus the earliest value for 
 *h<sub>e</sub>* is  *h<sub>u</sub>* + 1. 
Once a node reaches the configured height,
for all heights *h ≥ h<sub>e</sub>*, the consensus algorithm will
reject any votes that do not have vote extension data as invalid.

> Likewise, for all heights *h < h<sub>e</sub>*, any votes that *do* have vote extensions
> will be considered an error condition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Likewise, for all heights *h < h<sub>e</sub>*, any votes that *do* have vote extensions
will be considered an error condition.
```
```suggestion
Likewise, for all heights *h < h<sub>e</sub>*, any precommit messages that *do* have vote extensions
will also be rejected as malformed.
```

> Height *h<sub>e</sub>* is somewhat special, as calls to `PrepareProposal` MUST NOT

Reviewer 3: Is this comment necessary here, as this behavior will be enforced by CometBFT itself?

Author: I was also thinking about this.. However, this felt to me like information the app should be aware in terms of ,it is the one that has to provide this. CometBFT will enforce it and make sure they are there, otherwise crash.. But you as the application have to know that for this height you need to implement this behaviour.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think we need to mention that "special" height, as it will be noticeable to the app: they will see no extensions in `PrepareProposal`, but then they will be asked to extend and verify vote extensions at the same height. So they (app developers) need to be aware of this quirk

  current height's block header

Once the state machine has been restored and CometBFT has gathered this additional
information, it transitions to block sync. As of ABCI 2.0, if vote extensions are enabled, 
block sync is required to sync
at least one block before switching to consensus. This way, the node is guaranteed to have obtained

> the vote extensions (stored within the extended commit in the block store), which are needed to participate in consensus. The node can then transition to regular consensus operation. At this point the node operates like

Reviewer 2: This is good, but could you add a reference here to RFC100, to the place we explain the condition for switching in detail?

For a detailed description on the upgrade path, please refer to the corresponding 
[section](./../../docs/rfc/rfc-100-abci-vote-extension-propag.md#upgrade-path) in RFC-100.

There is a newly introduced [**consensus parameter**](./abci%2B%2B_app_requirements.md#abciparamsvoteextensionsenableheight): `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight`. 
This parameter represents the height at which vote extensions are 
required for consensus to proceed, with 0 being the default value (no vote extensions).
A chain can enable vote extensions either:

> * at genesis by setting `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight` to be equal to the `InitialHeight`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* at genesis by setting `VoteExtensionsEnableHeight` to be equal, e.g., to the `InitialHeight`
```
I'm suggesting this to tackle @adizere's concern, I think he's got a point (shouldn't imply that, if you set it at genesis then you MUST set it to _initialHeight_)
